coding styles (#151)
r-hub/blog: content/post/2022-02-21-code-style/index.Rmd

---
slug: code-style
title: "Coding style, coding etiquette" 
authors: 
- Maëlle Salmon 
- Christophe Dervieux
date: "2022-02-21" 
tags: 
- package development 
output: hugodown::hugo_document
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}

knitr::opts_chunk$set(fig.path = "", comment = "")
# knitr hook to make images output use Hugo options
knitr::knit_hooks$set(
  plot = function(x, options) {
    hugoopts <- options$hugoopts
    paste0(
      "{{<figure src=",
      '"', x, '" ',
      if (!is.null(hugoopts)) {
        glue::glue_collapse(
          glue::glue('{names(hugoopts)}="{hugoopts}"'),
          sep = " "
        )
      },
      ">}}\n"
    )
  }

> )

Author: I think neither blogdown nor hugodown have this, or maybe one of them does now :thinking: It's for taking advantages of Hugo figure shortcode. :slightly_smiling_face:

> )

Reviewer: No I don't think they have it seems quite useful :) Maybe that worth a Feature Request or a PR in **blogdown**. But I'll remember and maybe I'll do it :)

These rules help with better code clarity and collaboration.

Sometimes somes rules are enforced by the language (indentation in python), sometimes the language is quite loose, like... R where you can add a lot of spaces, and so in that case more style guides exist.

Coding style has an universal goal: making your code easier to understand and maintain, for you later and for your code collaborator.
Having a team/company style guide is common practice.
Major Tech Companies have style guides, e.g.
[Google](https://google.github.io/styleguide/)[^1].

[^1]: Note that the Google R style guide inspired the tidyverse styleguide but Google now refers to the tidyverse style guide as R style guide.

However there is no "right" coding style as the "correct" choice depends on personal preferences, and the [constraints at hand](https://www.heltweg.org/posts/who-wrote-this-shit/).

## Resources

One way to develop a sense of coding style is to read a lot of code, but where to learn about coding style explicitly?

### Specific R resources

The most popular, or at least most documented style guide out there is the [tidyverse style guide](https://style.tidyverse.org).

> Some variations on it include

Reviewer: At first I did not catch that, but should we really use the word variation ? It sounds like it is derived and at least some of the rules follow. I see the below list as other different organisation or personal preferences and not specifically a variation of tidyverse one. 

I think we should present it as tidyverse one is the norm and other derived from it. 

```suggestion
Some other style preferences include
```

-   [Mark Padgham's spacing preferences](https://docs.ropensci.org/pkgcheck/CONTRIBUTING.html#development-guidelines);
-   [Roger Peng's 8-space indentations](https://simplystatistics.org/posts/2018-07-27-why-i-indent-my-code-8-spaces/);
-   Yihui Xie's preference for equal sign assignments (as presented in this [issue comment](https://github.com/Robinlovelace/geocompr/issues/319#issuecomment-427376764));

> -   [Google R Style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/Rguide.html) with e.g. a preference for BigCamelCase for function names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [Google R Style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/Rguide.html), a fork of Tidyverse style guide but with variations e.g. a preference for BigCamelCase for function names.
```

-   [The Programmer's Brain by Felienne Hermans](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/57196550-the-programmer-s-brain) gives a perspective on e.g. how code smells or bad naming influence cognitive load.
    It is full of practical tips.

## Tools

To begin with the most important, or basic, tool here is probably to use an IDE, integrated development environment, like RStudio IDE or VSCODE, as IDEs come with, or easily support, code diagnostic tools.

### Diagnostic tools

#### lintr

Linting tools will indicate errors and potentially style preference violations.

The [lintr R package by Jim Hester](https://github.com/r-lib/lintr) has a lot of useful linters such as whether code is commented, whether lines are too long etc.

It is pretty common to find *linting tools* in all editors (VSCODE and others) and for most languages.
To set up lintr with your code editor refer to [its docs](https://github.com/r-lib/lintr#editors-setup).
Unless you have RStudio IDE and linting is the one included already in the IDE (for errors mainly only, not style preference).

> If you use VSCODE see <https://github.com/REditorSupport/vscode-R/wiki/R-Language-Service#formatting>.

Reviewer: Formatting in the R extensions uses styler. Maybe we should move the link to part below ? 

Link for VSCODE diagnostic would be https://github.com/REditorSupport/vscode-R/wiki/R-Language-Service#diagnostics

```suggestion
If you use VSCODE, [vscode-R](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Ikuyadeu.r) extension includes diagnostic tool - see <https://github.com/REditorSupport/vscode-R/wiki/R-Language-Service#diagnostics>.
```

> To use lintr in testthat see [`expect_lint()`](https://rdrr.io/cran/lintr/man/expect_lint.html).

Reviewer: I would give a bit more context on this.

```suggestion
Some teams likes to run diagnostic tools as part of their Continuous Integration (CI) workflow. lintr can be used in this context as part of tests suits with testthat - see [`expect_lint()`](https://rdrr.io/cran/lintr/man/expect_lint.html)
```

### Fixing tools

#### RStudio IDE shortcut for code indentation

In RStudio IDE selecting code and hitting `Ctrl + I` will re-indent code for you!

#### styler

The [styler R package](https://styler.r-lib.org) automatically reformats code.
Its documentation includes a handy vignette on [customizing styler](https://styler.r-lib.org/articles/customizing_styler.html), for when preferences differ from the default.
Examples:

-   the [tiny spaceout R package](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/spaceout) that adds spaces between code references.
-   the [grkstyle R package](https://github.com/gadenbuie/grkstyle) holding Garrick Aden-Buie's personal preferences.
-   the [styler.mlr R package](https://github.com/mlr-org/styler.mlr) implementing the mlr style guide.

The styler package documents some [third-part integration](https://styler.r-lib.org/articles/third-party-integrations.html): you don't have to remember to run styler manually.
In particular, to use styler on its own CI workflow on GitHub Actions: <https://github.com/r-lib/actions/tree/v2-branch/examples#style-package>

> 

Reviewer: I don't know how you would include a not like box (or maybe this should be in footnote) but I would add a disclaimer on: 

With fixing tools, your original source code will be modified. It is really adviced to use version control with your project - but (place emoji here) who does not use version control when coding nowadays ? If you do not, no worries we got you covered (place link to awesome blog post) 

What do you think ?

#### formatr R package

> The [formatr R package](https://yihui.org/formatr/) formats R code automatically too, but in a more opinionated way.

Reviewer: You're right with your question on opiniotated, i would change that

```suggestion
The [formatr R package](https://yihui.org/formatr/) formats R code automatically too, but with less customization possibilities.
```

For more tools helping with code improvements, refer to the [R-hub blog post "Workflow automation tools for package developers"](/2020/04/29/maintenance/) including tips on *when* to use such tools.

> ## A special note on ( R ) Markdown styling

Reviewer: Nice way of placing Markdown and R Markdown together ! 😄
